Author: Jordan Peterson
Link: https://www.amazon.com/Beyond-Order-More-Rules-Life/dp/0593084640
Status: Finished

### Summary
The book focuses on how to avoid the dangers that come with too much safety and order. While order is intuitively better than chaos, both of the extremes are frightening. On one side we have pure chaos, a place with no rules, and on the other side we have tyranny. We should aim for some middle ground, and this is very well explained in the first chapter. I'll summarize the book by each of the 12 rules separately.

Overall the book provides good advice and is critical of both opposing sides that we encounter -- most often these are the conservatives and libertarians. While Jordan Peterson is more conservative he does not shy away from criticising his side when warranted.

Peterson also provides a lot of real-life examples of the rules being used, or when they should have been used.

Note: The book was difficult to read in the Sloveanian translation, mostly due to very long sentences that made my thoughts wander here and there. I'll probably try to read the first book in English to see if that is better.

### 1. Rule one: Do not carelessly denigrate social institutions or creative achievement
We often fall into the trap of "siding" with someone or to equate ourselves with a philosophy, such as the bipolar diversity between convervatives and libertarians. The truth is, we need both of these. Social institutions which arise from the conservative side defend us from chaos. They have passed the test of time and are there for a reason. However, this does not mean that all of them should exist forever, they should not be set in stone. We just have to be careful not to danigrate them. On the other hand, creative achievement arises from the libertarian side. It is more akin to chaos, but sometimes we need it to destroy the social institutions that have become archaic. Rules keep things together, creativity and resistance make things grow and regenerate. Each rule is a creative act at some point.

Knowing when to follow rules and when to break them is key. Of course it is not an easy task, but despite that, the truth is, we need to be able to do both. This holds for the society as well as within ourselves. A verse from the Bible summarizes this well, when Jesus found someone working on the Sabbath: "If you truly know what you are doing, be blessed. But if you do not, be damned as a lawbreaker". Explanation: If you know why the rules are in place and you are ready to take the responsibility of making an exception because you see it as working for a higher purpose then you are doing good work (serving the spirit). On the other hand, if you break the rules because you don't want to understand them, then that will be your demise.

### 2. Rule two: Imagine who you could be and then aim single-mindedly at that
We always have to keep a deep, noble and higher goal to strive for. Of course, we will stumble, fall, deviate from the path from time to time, but we can always correct the course. It is Ok to fail, if we fail on the road to our goal and learn from it. Our goal also does not have to be set in stone, as we grow and learn we will adapt the goal. It can be difficult to differentiate between changing the course and giving up. If the new path is more challenging it is usually not giving up. Our goal will always move away from us, because we will adapt it to our current knowledge and strive for better more challenging tasks. However, on this path we will create our story, which has meaning and is productive.

### 3. Rule three: Do not hide unwanted things in the fog
If something bothers us, we should say it. Yes, it is that simple. Otherwise things starts stacking up, our dissatisfactions grows and our relationship with the other person or people deteriorates, sometimes beyond repair. Each of the problems we have in a relationship, especially with a partner, will repeat for every day for the rest of your life. How will that not immensely affect you? We have to put such things to light and hopefully we can negotiate a better future with our partner.

People believe it is worse to actively do something bad than to passively not do something good. However, not saying something is bothering us, not speaking up, can result in dire consequences. Sometimes this manifests as conscious decision not to know something (for example, something irregular going on in a company). "When ignorance is bliss it is stupid to be wise." Leaving such things in the fog can hide our target, mentioned in the previous chapter. In the fog, we are lost and we can't find the path to meaning and in turn happiness. If we work on something we want we might fail. If we don't even make it clear what we want, we will surely fail. To avoid this we have to confess our feelings and make ourselves voulnerable. Seek the knowledge of the unknown and put to light our true feelings and communicate them to the outside world. It is better to express our concerns from the position of our feelings, for example "I felt lonely for the last couple of days, can't go past thinking I did not get enough attention from your side ..." as opposed to being accusational, for example "You've been ingoring me".

In the long run, this consciouss blindness makes life foggy and empty. We always doubt ourselves, we are very confused. Questions arise, such as "Is this scary or am I just scared by nature?" or "Am I angry at someone because of what they did or because of my lack of control?"

With caring searching we could tip the balance into the favour of opportunity instead of obstacle. 

### 4. Rule four: Notice that opportunity lurks where responsibility has been abdicated
If you want to become irreplacable simply do useful things other people do not do. If you do not have the competencies for doing that -- why not become a person who has these competencies (see Rule 2). Difficult things are often worth it and easy things are often not worth doing. 

Usually people regret not starting something more than they regret doing something and failing at it -- in the latter case you at least have the option to learn something. We need a worthy goal to pursue in our life. By not taking responsibility, we take on all the suffering of life without any of its meaning. When you take on a challenge and face the world you get new knowledge and thus become more than you were before. 

We are temporally-aware beings and we know that our current actions have consequences in the future. There is a high risk of not being content if you know you are not doing everything you should be doing. 

What is the antidote to life's suffering? The highest possible goals. What is the necessary condition to achieve this goal? Taking on maximal responsibility, including the one others are trying to get rid of. When the going gets tough, you can at least say -- I'm doing this, and this is hard and the right thing to do. Our lifes get meaning in direct relation to the amount of responsibility we are ready to take on. With responsibility we minimize the suffering, not only our own, but on a higher scale, either at home, community or even further.

Writing the above paragraph I couldn't help but notice that this chapter relates a lot to Stoicism, where doing the right thing is the highest possible goal.

We often feel things aren't right in the world. And this can present an opportunity -- they are not because someone might not have taken responsibility when they should have. Being angry about it can spur us into action -- anger can be the door.

### 5. Rule five: Do not do what you hate
The main question of this chapter is: When do I stop being part of a concern-inducing process that is going on before us? An example is given of a business looking to rename things like a Flip chart (which might be offensive to people from the Philippines), or blackboard, or master key. At some point, this becomes too much. It make sense that supporting such behaviour and being a part of it will have a negative effect on our minds. We do things because we believe they are important -- but in this case we are forced to do things that are not. Therefore we work antagonistically against our values (see previous chapter). This is a road to hell. Of course this is only an example -- the overarching idea is that we should not work against our core values, do not betray ourselves and cheat in our own game, whichever those values might be.

Going against the current in such a way is not easy. Peterson describes an example of his client, who had to do the following (the price she had to pay):

- Fight her fear of retaliation and the find the knowledge that this fear is taking aways her love for the profession and making her feel cowardly.
- Extend her professional activities. She became a speaker promoting a counter argument to the one forced in the company. Find the literature and explore it in detail.

The result was personal growth and the wisdom that she sincerely contibutes to the society. While she had to change a couple of jobs -- had to fight several dragons -- all this work helped her fight her depression and increased her self-respect.

The good that people do is connected to the good in the world more closely than people think. The same holds for evil. We are more responsible for the state of the world that we think or than we wish to think. Therefore we have a responsibility. Every betrayal of our conscience makes the tyranny stronger and this compounds.

This is connected to knowing when to step over the boundaries of order (see Rule 1). We have to trust ourselves if we want to do something outside of the norm. This means we have to live fair, sensible and productive, in other words like someone we would trust. A sovereign individual is a force which prevents the society to become blind and deadly.

An almighty giant is not as almighty as we might think and we should let ourselves the option to fight. For that we have to fortify our position. This means we have to get ourselves into position to say "No" to things we do not wish to do -- because they are not inline with our values, not because we are lazy. You can also have a lateral move (when talking about a career). Even though this is a difficult process, you only have to be successful once to land a new opportunity. Leaving the current job is not necessarily a bad thing. Being rejected is not personal.

### 6. Rule six: Abandon Ideology
Peterson discusses that value, even if it seems subjective, is real. It does not necessarily have to be backed by science. An example is a revelation to a single person. It might be possible that the situation or phenomenon is just too complex to be understood by science at the moment, or maybe ever. An interesting though was given in [[Življenje, Smrt, Življenje]], where the author proposes: What is the only thing that you can be **sure** is real? And that is your consciousness. Everything else could be a mirage, a simulation, and so on. Peterson also talks about a similar topic -- how we all assume the reality of our individual existence and believe the same holds for others. He goes on to claim it is not unsensible to assume that this has roots in biological and physical structure. However, the fact that we often have similar experiences, relates religious experiences as part of our basic functions. It looks like something universal is calling from within. Why do we so easily assume this is not real, even though it is obvious and indispensable.

Two deadly ideologies emerged in the modern time: the Communism and Nazism. In communism the idea was that the collective will carry the burden of life. The problem was that not all people in the collective were good and often vengeful and envious murderers were in charge of important decisions such as the redistribution of wealth. The German National Socialists had the idea of the ideal higher human (Ubermensch) as a national formation.

Some other -isms: conservatism, socialism, feminism, postmodernism, ecologism,... The system of how to construct an -ism is relatively simple at the beginning -- you start with some abstraction such as economy, nation, environment. This simplifies things that are in reality very complex. All of those problems require a thorough analysis and later a thoughtful solution, which is very difficult to find. Ideology can put people on the "right" side of the equation without much effort and therefore the reward is easier to achieve -- it is easier to solve a simpler problem. In -isms you divide the world in big indifferentiable parts, describe the problems with them, decide who the bad guys are, prepare a small number of explanatory principles, and define a primary cause while overlooking several other causes that might be even more important. Then you can explain every other phenomenon as a secondary consquence of this new, totalitarian, system.

Teoreticizing like this is attractive to people who are smart but lazy, also cynical and vain. Ideological theories explain everything. There exist no more totalitarian statement and there is no other situation, where the the worst excesses of pride are manifested. The teaching of the story is: beware of intelectuals who make monoteisms our of their theories of motivation. Beware of univariate causes for complex problems!

Resentments comes when we blame the system for individual failure. We can not assume a collective fault. For example, if we are poor not all rich people are to blame. If we go down the way of resentment we risk bitterness in our life. Morally it is a lot safer to look for fault within, at least to the point someone who is honest and without consciouss blindness. Taking on the sins o the world -- taking the responsibility of the fact that some things are not as they should be in our life and elsewhere -- is part of the way of the messiah. Part of mimicking the hero in the deepest sense. Bad literary characters are good or evil. Good literary characters have good and evil within them. It is much better to assume that we are the enemy, that our weaknesses and imperfections make the world worse, than looking at ourselves as saints who will banish evil.

Monty Python once provided the instructions to play a flute: Blow into one end and move your fingers. It is true but useless, with important details missing. Ideologies are similar.

We need to be humble, take care of our family, take care of our lives, follow our conscience, find productive work. After that find a bigger problem and solve it, etc. But we need to give up ideology.

### Rule 7: Work as hard as you possibly can on at least one thing and see what happens
Pressure makes valuable things and this also hold for us. Most of the improvement comes when we work under pressure. However, if there are many contradictory wishes and pressures this takes a toll on us. To proceed we need a goal, we need to point (see Peterson's discussion in earlier sections on babies pointing). It is much better to be something specific, to be good at a single thing, than trying to be everything at once. It often seems we need so sacrifice something if we wish to focus on one thing and that is true. But there is always some sacrifice. This reminds me on the **fear of missing out**. Even though you fear missing out on one thing, if you actually manage to do/acquire that thing you missed out on another thing that you might or might not be aware of. And even despite sacrifice getting focused on a single thing usually brings relief.

Peterson suggests to pick a path and follow it, even if it is not ideal. It might bring you to where you need to be, to where the ideal path will reveal to you. As discussed in one of the previous chapters you can always adjust your path according to new knowledge. It is not a straight line, it's more of a zig-zag. Usually people are the happiest when their goals are aligned with character, love, family, friends, and career, usually in that order. **The worst decision you can make is no decision**. 

For all the things mentioned above we need, above all, discipline (see also [[Discipline Equals Freedom]] and Stoicism). An apprentice always needs to focus on one thing and strictly follow rules. But if they work hard enough on one thing they will become a master sooner or later (see Growth [[Mindset]]). And a master has the knowledge (or luxury) to change rules as discussed in the first chapter. And with that a master is able to change the civilization, the world, as knowing when to break rules, in other words walking on the brink of chaos, is the gear of progress.

There is also an interesting explanation of the 10 commandments in this chapter.

### Rule 8: Try to make one room in your home as beautiful as possible
This rule talks more specifically about art -- we should decorate one room in our home with art that speaks to us. But why is that? Peterson argues that beauty is our connection to the divine, to something that is beyond us. While we are finite, art is transcendental.

Artists usually don't really understand what they are doing. But they are often turning chaos into order. Even if we (laymen) are not familiar with an art's background or story, we can often sense something divine in it. Otherwise, museums would probably be rather empty. So the art speaks to us, it tries to tell us forgotten truths. It also provides us with the perspective of what is possible and can thus guide us out of our bubbles. Artists teach us to see. With adulthood we lost the connection to the now. On the other hand, children are always in awe of what is happening to them. We lost that wonder and art can help us regain it.

### Rule 9: If old memories still upset you, write them down carefully and completely
We usually suffer due to:

- Letting ourselves down/Betraying ourselves.
- Someone else betraying us or acting ill towards us.

If we still thinks about such past transgressions it means we have some unresolved issues related to the situation. We often don't even understand what happened to us, we just know our feelings towards the situation. Peterson proposes to change the perspective, to detach (see [[Discipline Equals Freedom]] for more on detaching) from the event in question. This allows us to look at it from a different perspective, as if it is happening to someone else. Is it still so bad? It could definitely be, but often the new perspective shines a less threatening light on the event. If others have hurt us we can try to understand their motivations (which is a lot easier if you look at it without emotions), or if it was us who let us down, we can try to understand our motivations at that time. We probably are not the same person anymore, luckily.

We have to face these situations voluntarily, that is the only way we can resolve them. Sometimes past events affect us too much because we were naive, we lived in a bubble and believes that everything is sunshine and rainbows. The best antidote to that is facing true evil. Reading on what humans are capable of and have done in the past. While sad, it will provide us with some inner strength that will allow us to face our past demons and our challenges in the future.

If we want to contribute in the Making, we need to know how we got to where we are. We are meant to turn chaos into order, but how can we do that if chaos follows us from our past, making us weak and unable to change for the better? We need to learn to let it go and resolve it. Asking God for something must be sincere -- do not use God's name in vein. In other words, you must truly commit to the wish, give it your all to make it happen. Do anything to make it work. When it comes to past trauma, the best way to do this is to write it down, talk about it, analyze it. Detach. It is hard, but it can free and protect us. Writing it down creates a story, a story with a lesson. And we've always been fascinated by people who can concisely tell a story and provide lessons -- one of the best examples is the Bible.


### Rule 10: Plan and work diligently to maintain the romance in your relationship
With time the romance and the spark in a relationship can become more of a luxury than the rule.  We stop dating, we sometimes forget what to actually do on dates. However it should not stop, we should take the time and put in the effort to keep it alive, otherwise we will become bitter towards each other. As most things, dating takes practice. If we start arranging more dates with our loved one we will become better at it. Each person is a mistery and we can still explore each other even after years of living together. Love makes us better people, when we're in love we strive to be our better selves and it is worth keeping that alive. We also have to be brave to trust the other person completely and to always tell the truth. The truth should be the pillar of our relationship, because without it there is no trust, and withou that we are lost.

Peterson describes a story from the book of Moses where Eve is made out of Adam. It symbolizes that not men nor women are perfect until they are joined together.

People often worry if they are together with the right person. But things like soul-mates are more of a fairy tale. There is no "the one". There are a lot of people with which a relationship would work, we probably don't find the most perfect one (by whatever criteria that would be). It is not about **finding** it is about **making**. You have to make the relationship work. 

There are 3 possible relationships:

- Tyranny (you do as I say).
- Slavery (I do as you say).
- Compromise/negotiation.

Obviously only one is acceptable, but it is hard work. On the other hand it is also key for romance.

One of the most important questions is "What do you want/wish for?". An answer we often get is "I don't know", usually because our SO does not want to talk about it. **We should not accept this answer.** Even if some part does not want to, another part of them does, and it is an important question that we have to resolve. Being nice is not the same as being good, and we need to be good.

We can leave some room for escape in the background (not committing fully) but that prevents us from reaching the transformation into a relationship (marriage) that works. A lot of people think about affairs at some point. Apart from other problems that come with affairs, we have to keep in mind that we often see our partner in their worst light, but the person we might think of having an affair with only in their best light. In a world of freedom, without responsibility, where all is simple, good, and easy. It is an illusion.

We should divide our duties/chores, because otherwise we will always end up fighting about them. We should also talk about personal things, at least 90 minutes a week (work, kids, need help, ...). Otherwise a distance can creep between us. Putting effort into everyday things, such as preparing for work or eating together can have a marvelous effect -- we spend a lot of time doing it, we should think about how to make it more pleasant. Romance is a game and we can't play it if there's other problems. So we should take care of these first.

Our SO also has a good effect on our mental health. Especially when we have some opposing traits. While we alone might be too extreme in one aspect (for example, nervous or calm) our partner can guide us to more moderation (calm, loving).

Peterson recommends scheduling time for romance. While it might sound boring and lacking spontaneity, it is often the best we can do. It is hard being spontaneous with 2 jobs and other responsibilities in life -- urgent before non-urgent. And when trying new things that one of the partners likes -- we should never punish them for trying something that we wish that they keep doing. In the end, a sincere conversation is the key to keep the romance going.

There is a very good summary of this chapter in the last paragraph in the book.


### Rule 11: Do not allow yourself to become resentful, deceitful, or arrogant
We have many resons to be resentful as the chaos we are battling against is sometimes stronger than us. The potential is in some ways the most real thing, because the past and the present are "dead past" and therefore exploring options that the potential brings seems like one of the most important goals. Potential is good and bad at the same time, we don't know what the realization is going to be.

We usually thinks of our lives in stories. In an abstract sense there are 7 main characters:
- Dragon of chaos which represent potential. For example, fire has the potential to enhance our lives and it has the potential to destroy. The dragon usually guards a treasure. So there is good and bad in potential. 
- Nature -- creating and destroying. While potential is unrealized, nature is a very real manifestation. While it gives us life it is also destructive. All things perish in nature, and new things grow. Destruction is a normality (see also Stoicism and [[Medidations]]), for example, cells in our body die every day. We can imagine sacrifice (for example, sacrifice your time now, to be better later) as a kind of destructive action. Without unpredictability there is only sterility. It is imoportant we are aware of the destructive side of nature -- we shouldn't put our children into cotton wool to protect them, they need to know it is not all sunshine and rainbows. Otherwise they will wish for unconsciousness when they meet evil in real life. Extreme sentimentality is a disease and a curse.
- Culture -- safety and tyranny, the wise king and the tyrant. This represent the social structure.
- Individual -- the hero and the villain. The individual is in a relationship to the other characters. He needs to be aware of them and act accordingly to make the world a better place. For example, individuals can be involved in the creation of culture -- will it be good or tyrannical. An example of that is democracy -- we either leave the government as it is if it is good, or we change it if it needs improvement.

Note while reading: I always found the American bipartisan political system inefficient -- why should the people only have 2 choices, as opposed to, for example Slovenia, where you can choose from several candidates. The author provides a good argument for the bipartisan system. One side needs autonomy to work well. If you have a very mixed government it can get paralyzed. Something similar has happened in Slovenia where Levica blocked the middle-left government to the extent they had to give up and the Right government took power. If only one side is ruling then it can put into action its plans better which will encourage progress. But once they start becoming too comfortable or working too much in their direction, the people will elect the other polarity. Then the progress on other areas will flourish for a mandate or two. And so on and so on.

**Resentment** makes the terror of life even worse. It is a mix of anger, self-pity, narcissism, and wish for revenge. We usually become resentful due to the bad characters described above. It is an understandable emotion but not appropriate. Not everyone is resentful, even if their lives are bad. Unfortunate things happen, we shouldn't be asking ourselves "Why me?" (an interesting saying I remember was "Do not say why me, but try me" -- you can handle it [[The Mountain is You]]). There is a randomness to it -- it is not personal. Resentment stems from the ego and when we remove the personal note we can be more rational about it.

We should be able to separate the unfortunate things into those that are of our own doing and those that are the reality of life. Then we should focus on the former and work on them. This will remove ome of our fear and we'll become braver. If we take a load on ourselves out of free will it is easier to carry. With becoming braver we become better people, friends, partners, and in turn make our communities better. When life gets tough, we need to look at the good characters to help us continue.

**Deceitfulness** (main manifestation is lying) can be divided into sins of action and sins of inaction. We lie because we want to get ahead. For sins of action, resentment combined with arrogance is often the underlying cause -- I am allowed to do it because I'm suffering. Lying begets more lying and a liar will sooner or later be found out. We seek justice from resentment, which makes our lives worse. When we are dealing with sins of inaction the root cause is usually nihilism -- a sin of vanity and arrogance, being sure ("Being certaint is absurd" by Voltaire), thinking we know all we need to know. Additionally, it comes from thinking that it is OK to take the easier road, to not take responsibility. But we should receive and give, when it is our turn we need to take responsibility. This will make people trust us, trust ourselves, and in turn become better -- create a better community, future. An example of not taking responsibility is Adam faulting Eve for giving him the apple.

Lies deform the reality (garbage in/garbage out) and our instincts that guide us through life -- in the end we can't trust our judgement anymore. Deceit requires that we don't follow our conscience, which is one of the main sins. The stucture of lying is similar to the structure of addiction. It is self-reinforcing if we are awarded for each lie while not getting caught.

How we turn potential into reality is based on our conscious decisions. To counter resentment and deceit we need to believe in ourselves, our close ones, in the structure of being. We need to be noble and that of itsef should be enough to counter the suffering. This is again a very Stoic stance, where acting in accordance with nature, ethics, and morality is the highest virtue. What would happen if everyone tried to be truthful to create a better tomorrow, instead of turning against the world with resentment and deceit?


### Rule 12: Be grateful in spite of your suffering
It is tempting to be bitter and resentful given life's woes. But humans are capable of bravely fighting our suffering -- courage is the antidote. If we look deep into the darkness we can see the light. As an example, a lot of people like watching horror and thriller movies, which is akin to looking into the abyss. But getting familiar with life's cruelty can help us be prepared to courageously fight it. And once we become comfortable fighting it for ourselves, we can extend our courage to our society. Despite our mortality, the main woe of life, we do good for this world.

There is a force in us that works contrary to our best intentions (see Mefisto in Goethe's Faust). We are angry at our weakness, at the unpredictability in life. How can we not lose faith when even Jesus did once -- God, why have you forsaken me? This feeds the malignant force in us. It can turn our minds to thoughts of meaninglessness. Would it not be better for life to not exist due to its woes? That's certainly what many who succumbed to this force thought, for example, nazis and school shooters. 

But why make a bad thing even worse? Why not muster the courage to be the one dependable person in trying times? We are capable, humans have been fighting suffering for a long time. We can fight this fight with thankfulness. We should be thankful that we nurture what is the best in us, that we are brave in the face of suffering, and that we are aware what is important. Because that will make us appreciate the important things more and we will put in effort to make them better. This holds the most true for our loved ones. Courage is love. It leads to improvement of life, while bitterness leads to destruction. We are thankful for our loved ones and this is the antidote to darkness.

